Improve question documentation (#11830)
PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn: docs/question/index.md

# Questions

Questions are the basic building blocks of PrairieLearn. They are the individual problems that students will solve, and they can be composed into assessments (homeworks and exams). Questions can be simple or complex, and they can be written in a variety of ways. This document describes how to create questions, including the directory structure, metadata, HTML templates, and server-side code.

## Question components

A question is made up of three main components:

1. **`info.json`**: Metadata about the question, including the question title, topic, and tags.

> 2. **`question.html`**: The HTML template that defines the question. This is where you write the question text and define the input elements. Reference the [HTML documentation](html.md) for more details.

Reviewer: Nit: would it make more sense to refer to it as the "template" documentation instead of the "HTML" documentation?

```suggestion
2. **`question.html`**: The HTML template that defines the question. This is where you write the question text and define the input elements. Reference the [template documentation](html.md) for more details.
```

Author: In 189fcab7d634a129d31bfb5c5fd1de4e2ee3cbd9 I renamed the file to `template.md`, and updated the links to say `question template documentation`.

# Questions

!!! note "Legacy questions"

>     Modern PrairieLearn questions are marked with `"type": "v3"`. This documentation describes modern v3 questions, although [legacy v2 questions](../oldQuestion.md#question-types-for-v1v2-format) are still supported by PrairieLearn, though will eventually be phased out.

Reviewer 2: Nit: realistically, we'll never remove support from this.

I'd be inclined to remove this note entirely. Folks who are using v2 question know what they're doing, and any new user from the past 7-8 years shouldn't need to know or care anything about v2 questions.

Author: 8de961fa8bacdf280e06dd8f5e73d124836d5b15

## Question components

A question is made up of three main components:

> 1. **`info.json`**: Metadata about the question, including the question title, topic, and tags. Reference the [`infoQuestion.json` schema](../schemas/infoQuestion.md) for more details.

Author: Removed in 270e31932b361b1a071ddceef08385a032a137ab.

2. **`question.html`**: The HTML template that defines the question. This is where you write the question text and define the input elements. Reference the [HTML documentation](html.md) for more details.

> 3. **`server.py`**: The server-side code that generates random parameters and grades the question. This is where you write the logic for generating random values, grading, and any other server-side code. This file is optional, but it is highly recommended to use it for any question that has randomization or grading logic. Reference the [server documentation](server.md) for more details.

Reviewer 2: Nits (adjust as you see fit):

```suggestion
3. **`server.py`**: This is where you write the logic for generating random values, grading student responses, and any other server-side code. This file is optional, but it is necessary for any question that has non-trivial randomization or custom grading behavior. Reference the [server documentation](server.md) for more details.
```

        `-- question.html
```

!!! tip

>     Avoid using term names (e.g. `Spring20/questionName`) or assessment names (e.g. `exam3/question12`) in your question directory structure, as these can make it harder to find and reuse questions across assessments and terms.

Author: I think @nwalters512 had some thoughts on this: https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/11830#discussion_r2054522170

>     Avoid using term names (e.g. `Spring20/questionName`) or assessment names (e.g. `exam3/question12`) in your question directory structure, as these can make it harder to find and reuse questions across assessments and terms.

Reviewer 2: No "I think" needed, I definitely had thoughts on this, was just about to reply with the same link!

>     Avoid using term names (e.g. `Spring20/questionName`) or assessment names (e.g. `exam3/question12`) in your question directory structure, as these can make it harder to find and reuse questions across assessments and terms.

Reviewer 3: While I agree from that comment that many people don't use topic-based question organization, I do think we should be normatively recommending that they do use it. The common alternative is `midterm3/question4` which is a complete nightmare.

I think saying "don't do X" without also saying "instead do Y" is not very helpful for people. In this case, they've always thought about questions as being named like "question 4 on midterm 3 from Spring 2020", so it may well not be obvious to them what an alternative naming scheme would even be. I think a recommendation is helpful and of course folks are completely free to ignore us (and they almost certainly will).

>     Avoid using term names (e.g. `Spring20/questionName`) or assessment names (e.g. `exam3/question12`) in your question directory structure, as these can make it harder to find and reuse questions across assessments and terms.

Author: I added a weaker recommendation in 605e1733501cd134104f3573b366c1874a30e4e3.

        `-- question.html
```

> !!! tip
> 
>     Organize your questions by kind. A recommended folder structure is `topic/subtopic/question`. Folder layouts like `exam3/question12` or `Spring20/questionName` can make it harder to find and reuse questions.

Reviewer 2: I'm wary of actually recommending this organization structure, mostly because I'm not actually sure how common it is. I think the other recommendation to avoid tying questions to specific terms or assessments is good though.

```suggestion
!!! tip

    Avoid using term names (e.g. `Spring20/questionName`) or assessment names (e.g. `exam3/question12`) in your question directory structure, as these can make it harder to find and reuse questions across assessments and terms.
```

Author: 8de961fa8bacdf280e06dd8f5e73d124836d5b15

PrairieLearn assumes independent questions; nothing ties them together. However, each question could have multiple parts (inputs that are validated together).

!!! info

    An extensive library of example questions can be found under the [`exampleCourse/questions`](https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/blob/master/exampleCourse/questions) directory of PrairieLearn. You can also view these questions by [running PrairieLearn locally](../installing.md/#running-instructions).

> ## Metadata (`info.json`)

Reviewer 3: As pointed out in the assessment docs PR (https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/1672#issuecomment-2839394991) do we want to replace these hand-written tables of properties with link to the autogenerated ones? Or could we auto-generate the table in this file?

Author: I think @nwalters512 might have some thoughts on that (relevant comment: https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/11830#discussion_r2054700733)

Reviewer 3: I went back and forwards on this myself in the context of the assessment docs. I agree that inline tables are friendlier.

Reviewer 2: My specific concern there was with the docs that were generated from a Python docstring. I'm slightly more enthusiastic about inlining something generated from a schema, though I actually find the table format much better as "initial" documentation (idk quite what to call it, but I think there's a distinction between "here's our introduction to X" and "here's a detailed and comprehensive but machine-generated description of X").

I find the table easier to quickly parse; the full schema description generated from the schema is much denser and less scannable, IMO. Maybe this just means we need more Python plugins to generate a table view?

Here they both are for comparison:

<img width="861" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-29 at 15 14 23" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e97cf610-4133-41eb-8398-8d1a5361f88f" />
<img width="850" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-29 at 15 14 15" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/70cf3c4d-bfef-41b4-81cf-42f7293bbacd" />

Author: For reference, I am using https://github.com/sbrunner/jsonschema2md. I didn't find another plugin that looked as nice as this.

Reviewer 3: I agree the table format is much nicer here. I also like the fact that we can have links to other parts of the docs (like the external grading docs above). Maybe I'll revert the changes to the assessment docs?

Author: I have to agree with @nwalters512 here that the autogenerated docs don't look quite as nice as the tables for a overview of everything.

Author: Going to resolve this as it seems that we are in agreement that the manual table is a good idea here. I also think a revert to the assessment docs, with this in mind, makes sense.

| `shareSourcePublicly`    | boolean | Whether the source code of the question should be available                                                                                                            |
| `sharingSets`            | array   | Sharing sets which the question belongs to                                                                                                                             |

!!! note "Local development note"

    Any time you edit a question `info.json` file on a local copy of PrairieLearn, you need to click “Load from disk” to reload the changes. Edits to HTML or Python files can be picked up by reloading the page. You might also need to generate a new variant of a question to run new Python code.

> ### Question Sharing

Author: I suspect this will have some merge conflicts.

| `shareSourcePublicly`    | boolean | Whether the source code of the question should be available                                                                                                            |
| `sharingSets`            | array   | Sharing sets which the question belongs to                                                                                                                             |

!!! note "Local development note"

>     Any time you edit a question `info.json` file on a local copy of PrairieLearn, you need to click “Load from disk” to reload the changes. Edits to HTML or Python files can be picked up by reloading the page. You might also need to generate a new variant of a question to run new Python code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Any time you edit a question `info.json` file on a local copy of PrairieLearn, you need to click “Load from disk” to reload the changes. Although edits to HTML or Python files may be picked up by reloading the page, you might also need to generate a new variant in some cases, such as changes to question generation or to element arguments.
```

Author: ```
Most edits to HTML or Python files will be picked up by reloading the page. However, if you made changes to question generation or element arguments, you might also need to generate a new variant.
```

workshopping...

Author: I applied the workshopped text in 189fcab7d634a129d31bfb5c5fd1de4e2ee3cbd9.

### Question Sharing

> Any question that is marked with `"sharePublicly": true` or `"shareSourcePublicly": true` will be considered and displayed as being published for free use under the [CC-BY-NC](https://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) license. Questions may be privately shared to individual courses using sharing sets, as explained in the [sharing documentation](../questionSharing.md). Sharing sets that a question belongs to are specified as a list of strings. These must match sharing sets that are declared in the [course configuration](../course/index.md#adding-sharing-sets).

Author: ![CleanShot 2025-04-29 at 17 09 04@2x](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2d911aea-c316-4b65-a384-270e6f7e06ac)
[CC BY-NC-ND](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) might be a good choice.

| `clientFilesCourseStyles`    | The styles required by this question relative to `[course directory]/clientFilesCourse`.          |
| `clientFilesCourseScripts`   | The scripts required by this question relative to `[course directory]/clientFilesCourse`.         |

Additional details about how to access these fields from `server.py` can be found in the [`server.py` documentation](server.md#accessing-files-on-disk).

> ### Non-randomized questions

Author: I moved these sections up so that all the documentation about question configuration is together.

| `clientFilesCourseStyles`    | The styles required by this question relative to `[course directory]/clientFilesCourse`.          |
| `clientFilesCourseScripts`   | The scripts required by this question relative to `[course directory]/clientFilesCourse`.         |

Additional details about how to access these fields from `server.py` can be found in the [`server.py` documentation](server.md#accessing-files-on-disk).

### Non-randomized questions

> While it is recommended that all questions contain random parameters, sometimes it is impractical to do this. For questions that don't have a meaningful amount of randomization in them, the `info.json` file should set `"singleVariant": true`. This has the following effects:

Reviewer 4: Might be worth mentioning that this will help ChatGPT / Google-proof questions, even if the only randomness is superficial flavor text like people or place names. Also worth mentioning the Faker library is especially good for this.

Author: It may help with Google, skeptical about ChatGPT.

Maybe a tip for random parameter generation with faker?

Author: Added section in 70a48696e4fd3c1f41deb53e22204723e1e8e1af.

- On `Homework`-type assessments, each student will only ever be given one variant of the question, which they can repeatedly attempt without limit. The correct answer will never be shown to students.

> - On `Exam`-type assessments, all questions are effectively single-variant, so the `singleVariant` option has no effect.

Author: Changed in 54b08db5dccd492c1a2193cc127031001a00f7e8.

> - On `Exam`-type assessments, all questions are effectively single-variant, so the `singleVariant` option has no effect.

Reviewer 3: Ignore this, I'm not sure what I was thinking, I'm going to blame jet lag 😅

> - On `Exam`-type assessments, all questions are effectively single-variant, so the `singleVariant` option has no effect.

Author: > On `Exam`-type assessments, each student only can attempt one variant of the question. The `singleVariant` option ensures all students will receive the same exact variant of the question.

> - On `Exam`-type assessments, all questions are effectively single-variant, so the `singleVariant` option has no effect.

Reviewer 2: @reteps unresolving, please see Matt's comment above.

> - On `Exam`-type assessments, all questions are effectively single-variant, so the `singleVariant` option has no effect.

Author: 👍 Reverted in b96c8e6a65325e9c6b8e5888f6e9eb57c18b2833.

## Grading student answers

!!! note

    This section provides a summary of the [question template documentation](template.md) and the [server.py documentation](server.md). It is recommended to read those documents first for more context.

For most elements, there are four different ways of auto-grading the student answer. This applies to elements like [`pl-number-input`](../elements.md#pl-number-input-element) and [`pl-string-input`](../elements.md#pl-string-input-element) that allow students to input an answer of their choosing, but not [`pl-multiple-choice`](../elements.md#pl-multiple-choice-element) or [`pl-checkbox`](../elements.md#pl-checkbox-element) that are much more constrained. The four ways are:

1. Set the correct answer using the correct-answer attributes for each element in `question.html`. This will use the built-in grading methods for each element. Given that this option is typically used for answers with a hard-coded value, without randomization, it is not expected to be used frequently.

2. Set `data["correct_answers"][VAR_NAME]` in `server.py`. This is for questions where you can pre-compute a single correct answer based on the (randomized) parameters.

> 3. Write a [custom `grade(data)`](#custom-generation-and-grading-serverpy) function in server.py that checks `data["submitted_answers"][VAR_NAME]` and sets scores. This can do anything, including having multiple correct answers, testing properties of the submitted answer for correctness, compute correct answers of some elements based on the value of other elements, etc.

Author: Resolved in [c0128a8](https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/11830/commits/c0128a81fdef495a43fb3f7df9d987bdccaafde6).

4. Write an [external grader](../externalGrading.md), though this is typically applied to more complex questions like coding.

If a question has more than one of the above options, each of them overrides the one before it. Even if options 3 (custom grade function) or 4 (external grader) are used, then it can still be helpful to set a correct answer so that it is shown to students as a sample of what would be accepted. If there are multiple correct answers then it's probably a good idea to add a note with [`pl-answer-panel`](../elements.md#pl-answer-panel-element) that any correct answer would be accepted, and the displayed answer is only an example. Moreover, if there is no relevant information to display on the correct answer panel (i.e., a question has multiple correct answers and is meant to be attempted until a full score is achieved), then the panel can be hidden by setting `showCorrectAnswer: false` in `info.json`.

> ### Custom grading best practices

Author: This text was moved to `server.md`.

```python title="server.py"
import random
import prairielearn as pl
def generate(data):
    # Generate random parameters
    data["params"]["m"] = random.randint(1, 10)
    data["params"]["a"] = random.randint(1, 10)

    # Compute the correct answer
    data["correct_answers"]["F"] = data["params"]["m"] * data["params"]["a"]
```

!!! info

    More information about `server.py`, custom grading, and more can be found in the [server.py documentation](server.md).

## Grading student answers

Elements like [`pl-multiple-choice`](../elements.md#pl-multiple-choice-element) or [`pl-checkbox`](../elements.md#pl-checkbox-element), which aren't freeform answers, are automatically graded based on the element parameters. For other elements, like [`pl-number-input`](../elements.md#pl-number-input-element) and [`pl-string-input`](../elements.md#pl-string-input-element), which have students input an answer of their choosing, there are four different ways of auto-grading the student answer:

> 1. Set the correct answer using the correct-answer attributes for each element in `question.html`. This will use the built-in grading methods for each element. This option is typically used for answers with a hard-coded value (i.e. if `"singleVariant": true` in `info.json`), and is not expected to be used in most circumstances.

Author: Changed in 6408ede3ac9fe51ab8d193ea476887f9d181752a.

2. Set `data["correct_answers"][VAR_NAME]` in `server.py`. This is for questions where you can pre-compute a single correct answer based on the (randomized) parameters.

> 3. Write a [custom grading function](./server.md#step-5-grade) in `server.py` that checks `data["submitted_answers"][VAR_NAME]` and sets scores. This can do anything, including having multiple correct answers, testing properties of the submitted answer for correctness, compute correct answers of some elements based on the value of other elements, etc.

Author: Changed in 6408ede3ac9fe51ab8d193ea476887f9d181752a.

4. Write an [external grader](../externalGrading.md), though this is typically applied to more complex questions like coding.

> If a question uses more than one method for grading, higher-numbered grading methods override results of lower-numbered grading methods. If you grade a question using a custom grading function (option 3) or an external grader (option 4), it is recommended to set the correct answer so that students can see it in the answer panel. More details about providing feedback on student answers can be found in the `"answer"` panel section of the [question template documentation](template.md#answer-panel).

Author: Rephrased the first sentence as
> If a question uses more than one method for grading, options 3 and 4 override options 1 and 2.

> If a question uses more than one method for grading, higher-numbered grading methods override results of lower-numbered grading methods. If you grade a question using a custom grading function (option 3) or an external grader (option 4), it is recommended to set the correct answer so that students can see it in the answer panel. More details about providing feedback on student answers can be found in the `"answer"` panel section of the [question template documentation](template.md#answer-panel).

Author: Changed in 6408ede3ac9fe51ab8d193ea476887f9d181752a.

The `question.html` is regular HTML, with four special features:

> 1. Any text in double-curly-braces (like `{{params.m}}`) is substituted with variable values. These values typically are defined by a [question's `server.py`](#custom-generation-and-grading-serverpy).

Reviewer 4: I think you should just state that full Mustache substitution is enabled, instead of just this description, which is a little incomplete.

Author: I'll add back the Mustache templating link so that this is clear.

Author: Added in 70a48696e4fd3c1f41deb53e22204723e1e8e1af.

The `question.html` is regular HTML, with four special features:

> 1. Any text in double-curly-braces (like `{{params.m}}`) is substituted with variable values using [Mustache](https://mustache.github.io/mustache.5.html). These values typically are defined by a [question's `server.py`](#custom-generation-and-grading-serverpy).

Reviewer: I think this discussion should also be added to the html.md document, the current version seems quite eager to use advance Mustache features before describing the basics.

Author: I somewhat agree, but some of this information seems important "at a glance". I'm not sure the best way to handle this -- additionally, this list fails to mention the different panels of a question.

Reviewer: To be clear: I don't mean move it there, I mean copy it (or something similar) there. I believe the html.md should start with simpler examples using `{{params.xyz}}` instead of moving directly to conditional rendering.

Author: Gotcha, I will do that.

Author: Changed in d26f5c0ebf3dae1327cabfcedc8189dc52f12366. Let me know what you think!

2. Special HTML elements (like `<pl-number-input>`) enable input and formatted output. See the [list of PrairieLearn elements](../elements.md).

   :warning: **All submission elements must have unique `answers-name` attributes.** This is necessary for questions to be graded properly.

3. A special `<markdown>` tag allows you to write Markdown inline in questions.
4. LaTeX equations are available within HTML by using `$x^2$` for inline equations, and `$$x^2$$` or `\[x^2\]` for display equations.

!!! info

    More information about `question.html` is in the [question.html documentation](html.md). Some non-intuitive aspects of Markdown and LaTeX are described there.

## Custom generation and grading (`server.py`)

The `server.py` file for each question creates randomized question variants by generating random parameters and the corresponding correct answers. A minimal `server.py` might set `data["params"]` and `data["correct_answers"]`, and then use the built-in grading ability of the PrairieLearn elements to grade the students submission.

```python title="server.py"
import random

> import prairielearn as pl

Author: Fixed in 93fc02e6a9ccaa6cffe07c83fbaff15bc5ce0696.

def generate(data):
    # Generate random parameters
    data["params"]["m"] = random.randint(1, 10)
    data["params"]["a"] = random.randint(1, 10)

    # Compute the correct answer
    data["correct_answers"]["F"] = data["params"]["m"] * data["params"]["a"]
```

!!! info

    More information about `server.py`, custom grading, and more can be found in the [server.py documentation](server.md).

> ### Randomization

Author: I think this is now resolved.

Question variants are randomized based on the variant seed (`data["variant_seed"]`), and all random generators (`random`, `np.random`, etc.) are seeded with this value.

> If you need to generate Fake data, you can use the [`faker`](https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/) library. This is useful for generating random names, addresses, and other data that looks real but is not.

Author: @eliotwrobson do you want to respond here? This was added in response to your comment: https://github.com/PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn/pull/11830#discussion_r2055016142

> If you need to generate Fake data, you can use the [`faker`](https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/) library. This is useful for generating random names, addresses, and other data that looks real but is not.

Author: I converted this to a collapsible tip in bb77da88f332435e6ae3e852338a4fe6b8f74b6f. It feels like a good compromise.

> If you need to generate Fake data, you can use the [`faker`](https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/) library. This is useful for generating random names, addresses, and other data that looks real but is not.

Reviewer 3: Ok, fine, I still would like to hear whether there are actually any uses of this in practice. A quick search over repos shows a single stats class using it and almost no-one else.

> If you need to generate Fake data, you can use the [`faker`](https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/) library. This is useful for generating random names, addresses, and other data that looks real but is not.

Reviewer 4: I agree with Matt in the case of problems that are used on exams or that have shorter text descriptions, but for even short word problems, the ability to add fake names or cities has come up (at least for our course). The main benefit of having this here is that most people already know how to generate random numbers in Python (or at least, can figure it out without too much input from us), but they may not know about this library, and this is pretty low overhead for randomness that can meaningfully disguise questions on internet searches.

> If you need to generate Fake data, you can use the [`faker`](https://faker.readthedocs.io/en/master/) library. This is useful for generating random names, addresses, and other data that looks real but is not.

Reviewer 3: Sounds reasonable!

The `question.html` is regular HTML, with four special features:

1. Any text in double-curly-braces (like `{{params.m}}`) is substituted with variable values. These values typically are defined by a [question's `server.py`](#custom-generation-and-grading-serverpy).
2. Special HTML elements (like `<pl-number-input>`) enable input and formatted output. See the [list of PrairieLearn elements](../elements.md).

   :warning: **All submission elements must have unique `answers-name` attributes.** This is necessary for questions to be graded properly.

3. A special `<markdown>` tag allows you to write Markdown inline in questions.
4. LaTeX equations are available within HTML by using `$x^2$` for inline equations, and `$$x^2$$` or `\[x^2\]` for display equations.

!!! info

>     More information about `question.html` is in the [question.html documentation](html.md). Some non-intuitive aspects of the Markdown and LaTeX are described there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    More information about `question.html` is in the [question.html documentation](html.md). Some non-intuitive aspects of Markdown and LaTeX are described there.
```

Author: 8de961fa8bacdf280e06dd8f5e73d124836d5b15

## Custom generation and grading (`server.py`)

> The `server.py` file for each question creates randomized question variants by generating random parameters and the corresponding correct answers. A minimal `server.py` might set `data["params"]` and `data["correct_answers"]`, and then use the built-in grading ability of the PrairieLearn elements to grade the students submission. A complete tutorial and example of a `server.py` file is described on the [server.py documentation](server.md) page.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence here seems redundant with the below `!!! info` section.

Author: 8de961fa8bacdf280e06dd8f5e73d124836d5b15

4. Write an [external grader](../externalGrading.md), though this is typically applied to more complex questions like coding.

If a question uses more than one method for grading, higher-numbered grading methods override results of lower-numbered grading methods. Even if options 3 (custom grade function) or 4 (external grader) are used, then it can still be helpful to set a correct answer so that it is shown to students as a sample of what would be accepted. If there are multiple correct answers then it's probably a good idea to add a note with [`pl-answer-panel`](../elements.md#pl-answer-panel-element) that any correct answer would be accepted, and the displayed answer is only an example. Moreover, if there is no relevant information to display on the correct answer panel (i.e., a question has multiple correct answers and is meant to be attempted until a full score is achieved), then the panel can be hidden by setting `showCorrectAnswer: false` in `info.json`.

> ## Question Lifecycle

Reviewer 2: Nit (sentence case headings):

```suggestion
## Question lifecycle
```

Author: 8de961fa8bacdf280e06dd8f5e73d124836d5b15

The diagram below shows the lifecycle of a question, including the server functions called, the different panels that are rendered, and points of interaction with the student.

> ![Diagram showing the lifecycle of a question](./lifecycle.d2){layout="dagre" scale="0.5" pad="0" }

Author: Moved in 270e31932b361b1a071ddceef08385a032a137ab.
